Eric Shen
3966363
TA: Bridget O’Connell
Exoticism in Carmen and Death in Venice
In Musical Exoticism: Images and Reflections, Ralph Locke describes musical exoticism as using a foreign element to evoke the feeling of something different from home (Locke 47). This typically refers to works which were created for a Western audience and use some kind of non-Western element, typically from the East, as the foreign element. Locke continues by introducing the idea that musical exoticism falls on a spectrum, ranging from pure exoticism to transcultural composing. Locke describes pure exoticism as "The Exotic-Style Paradigm assumes that music is, by compositional intent, exotic and that it registers as exotic to the listener - if it incorporates specific musical signifiers of Otherness" (Locke 48). By "signifiers of Otherness", Locke states that in pure exoticism foreign or "exotic" elements are used with the "intent" separate the home audience from the foreign place. Thus pure exoticism uses something that would seem foreign to the audience with the intent to highlight a group as different or to "other" someone. On the other side of the spectrum of musical exoticism is transcultural composing. Locke states, "pieces typical of Transcultural Composing blend, interweave, or merge musical elements that the composer would recognize as being "our own" with those of the distant Other culture" (Locke 228). Based on Locke's spectrum of musical exoticism, Georges Bizet's Carmen is an example of pure exoticism, which differs from Benjamin Britten’s Death in Venice which lies close to pure exoticism but is somewhere between the two extremes of the spectrum. 
	Bizet’s Carmen is an example of pure exoticism due to the use of non-Western elements to intentionally "other" the Roma character Carmen. The Roma are an ethnic group in Europe often referred to as Gypsies. Common stereotypes included an association with violence, a disregard for the law, and most notably the sexualization of Roma women. Roma women were also associated with singing and dancing which was linked to the stereotype of sexual promiscuity and seduction (Locke 155). These stereotypes are attributed to the Roma character Carmen in the first act, Habanera. In the act, Carmen performs on the street, entertaining and teasing the men watching her performance. In Music in the Nineteenth Century, Walter Frisch describes the performance as, "although suitably exotic in this context, would have sounded familiar to many in the audience, as Bizet based it on a song in Afro-Cuban style by a Spanish composer whose work was popular in Parisian cabaret" (Frisch 170). This piece is exotic as Habanera is based on an "Afro-Cuban" pop song which was well known at the time. Thus an audience would be able to identify Carmen's performance as exotic. Bizet uses something that "would have sounded familiar" to the audience to highlight Carmen's role as an entertainer in the opera, which stands out as musical performances were often complex arias which conveyed the emotions of a character. Thus, because Carmen sings something exotic and something that would stand out compared to typical Western Opera characters, the audience recognizes her as someone different, or someone "other". The careful selection of a pop song that would sound exotic also indicates Bizet's intent to “other” Carmen. The process of "othering" is demonstrated even more clearly in the second act, during which Carmen performs for Don Jose who interrupts to confess his love for Carmen. Frisch describes the second act as, "Carmen dances seductively and plays castanets while singing a wordless Spanish-style vocalise [...] Don Jose responds with a passionate aria, La Fleur que tu M'avais Jetee, with pulsating rhythms, a broad lyrical melody, and chromatic harmonies" (Frisch 171). Once again non-Western elements such as the "castanets" and the "wordless Spanish-style vocalise" are present in Carmen's performance. These foreign elements would be perceived as different to the audience and thus indicates Carmen is somehow different or "othered". Additionally, the "seductive" nature of Carmen's dance ties Carmen into Roma stereotypes, thus attributing certain characteristics to her and further "othering" her from the West. This contrasts from Don Jose who sings an "aria" described with "pulsating rhythms, a broad lyrical melody, and chromatic harmonies", which would be the typical musical performance one could expect from a Western Opera. The contrast between the two characters indicates Bizet's intention is to "other" Carmen. Thus Carmen is a clear example of pure exoticism as Bizet uses foreign elements to intentionally “other” Carmen. The process of “othering” is present in Carmen differs from the “othering” in another Opera, Death in Venice. 
	Britten’s Death in Venice lies close to pure exoticism as Gamelan music is used to “other” the homosexual character, but differs from Carmen due to the intent of the author. Death in Venice follows Gustav Aschenbach, a writer who falls in love with a young boy named Tadzio. The attraction was accompanied by music based on the Gamelan music from Bali. In Music in the Late Twentieth Century, Richard Taruskin writes the following on the homosexual attraction, “he painted the boy (who does not sing) in exotic ‘oriental’ colors, surrounding him with an aureole of Balinese gamelan music” (Taruskin 255). The foreign element, Gamelan music, is used to indicate Aschenbach’s attraction for Tadzio. Exotic or “oriental” elements are commonly used to sexualize a subject, as seen in Carmen. The “gamelan music” that “surround[s]” Tadzio is also used to sexualize him similar to the foreign elements used to sexualize Carmen. As a result, the foreign elements highlight the homosexual attraction and indicate that it’s something different and thus “others” Aschenbach as a homosexual male. Due to this othering, Death in Venice closely resembles pure exoticism. However, it is not quite pure exoticism as the “othering” in Death in Venice differs from the “othering” in Carmen. This is due to the difference in intent. The intent behind the use of the Gamelan music wasn't to "other" homosexual people but instead was intended as a way for Britten to express himself. This is because Britten and his partner Peter Pears were homosexual but had to hide it due to British laws. Taruskin describes Britten's situation as "that issue is homosexuality: or more specifically, hidden, ‘closeted' homosexuality, ‘the love that dare not speak its name,' which was for many, and remains for some, a tormented way of life. Among them were Britten and Pears" (Taruskin 246). Taruskin highlights Britten's inability to "speak" about his love and his resulting "tormented way of life" where he had to stay "hidden" and remain "closeted". However, Britten's works such as Death in Venice gave him an opportunity to discreetly express himself. Thus, Death in Venice is not quite pure exoticism and differs from Carmen because even though both use foreign elements to “other” someone, Britten’s intention was to express his hidden feelings while Bizet’s intention was to present Carmen as an “other”. 
To conclude, when Locke’s spectrum of musical exoticism is applied to Bizet’s Carmen and Britten’s Death in Venice it can be argued that the former is a clear example of pure exoticism while the latter lies close to pure exoticism but differs from Carmen. 
 
Works Cited
Frisch, Walter. "Chapter 9: Verdi, Operetta, and Popular Appeal" In Music in the Nineteenth Century, 168-172. W.W. Norton and Company, 2012.
Locke, Ralph P., and Ralph P. Locke. Musical Exoticism: Images and Reflections. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011. 44 .
Taruskin, Richard. Music in the Late Twentieth Century. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 2010.

